# Supervised learning with quantum-enhanced feature spaces

**Vojtěch Havlíček$^{1,2}$, Antonio D. Córcoles$^{1*}$, Kristan Temme$^{1*}$, Aram W. Harrow$^3$, Abhinav Kandala$^1$, Jerry M. Chow$^1$ & Jay M. Gambetta$^1$**

**Machine learning and quantum computing are two technologies that each have the potential to alter how computation is performed to address previously untenable problems. Kernel methods for machine learning are ubiquitous in pattern recognition, with support vector machines (SVMs) being the best known method for classification problems. However, there are limitations to the successful solution to such classification problems when the feature space becomes large, and the kernel functions become computationally expensive to estimate. A core element in the computational speed-ups enabled by quantum algorithms is the exploitation of an exponentially large quantum state space through controllable entanglement and interference. Here we propose and experimentally implement two quantum algorithms on a superconducting processor. A key component in both methods is the use of the quantum state space as feature space. The use of a quantum-enhanced feature space that is only efficiently accessible on a quantum computer provides a possible path to quantum advantage. The algorithms solve a problem of supervised learning: the construction of a classifier. One method, the quantum variational classifier, uses a variational quantum circuit$^{1,2}$ to classify the data in a way similar to the method of conventional SVMs. The other method, a quantum kernel estimator, estimates the kernel function on the quantum computer and optimizes a classical SVM. The two methods provide tools for exploring the applications of noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers$^3$ to machine learning.**

The intersection between machine learning and quantum computing has attracted considerable attention in recent years$^{4–6}$. This has led to a number of recently proposed quantum algorithms$^{1,2,7–9}$. Here we present two quantum algorithms that have the potential to run on near-term quantum devices. A suitable class of algorithms for such noisy devices employs short-depth circuits, because they are amenable to error-mitigation techniques that reduce the effect of decoherence$^{10,11}$. There are convincing arguments to indicate that even very simple circuits are hard to simulate classically$^{12,13}$. The algorithm we propose takes on the original problem of supervised learning: the construction of a classifier. For this problem, we are given data from a training set $T$ and a test set $S$ of a subset $\Omega \subset \mathbb{R}^d$. Both are assumed to be labelled by a map $m: T \cup S \rightarrow \{+1, -1\}$ unknown to the algorithm. The training algorithm receives only the labels of the training data $T$. The goal is to infer an approximate map on the test set $\tilde{m}: S \rightarrow \{+1, -1\}$ such that it agrees with high probability with the true map $m(\boldsymbol{s}) = \tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{s})$ on the test data $\boldsymbol{s} \in S$. For this task to be meaningful it is assumed that there is a correlation between the labels given for training and the true map. A classical approach to this problem uses so-called support vector machines (SVMs)$^{14}$. A quantum version of this approach has already been proposed in ref. $^{15}$, where an exponential improvement can be achieved if data is provided in a coherent superposition. However, when data is provided in the conventional way, that is, from a classical computer, then the methods of ref. $^{15}$ do not yield this speed-up.

Here we propose two binary classifiers that process data that is provided classically and use the quantum state space as feature space. The data is mapped non-linearly to a quantum state $\Phi: \boldsymbol{x} \in \Omega \rightarrow |\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|$; see Fig. 1a. In the first approach we use a variational circuit as given in refs $^{1,2,16,17}$ followed by a binary measurement. Any binary measurement that classifies the data based on the probability of observing one outcome over the other implements a separating hyperplane in state space. Like an SVM, this approach constructs a linear decision function in feature space. The second approach builds on this observation and constructs the hyperplane using a classical SVM, only using the quantum computer to estimate the kernel function. This second approach inherits the performance guarantees from the classical SVM. We implement both classifiers on a superconducting quantum processor with five coupled superconducting transmons, only two of which are used in this work, as shown in Fig. 2a. In the experiment, we want to separate the question of whether the classifier can be implemented in hardware from the problem of choosing a suitable feature map for a practical dataset. The data that are classified here are chosen so that they can be classified with 100% success to verify the method. We experimentally demonstrate that this success ratio is achieved.

Training and classification with conventional SVMs is efficient when inner products between feature vectors can be evaluated efficiently$^{14,18,19}$. Classifiers based on quantum circuits, such as the one presented in Fig. 2c, cannot provide a quantum advantage over a conventional SVM if the feature vector kernel $K(\boldsymbol{x}, \boldsymbol{z}) = |\langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | \Phi(\boldsymbol{z}) \rangle|^2$ can be computed efficiently on a classical computer. For example, a classifier that uses a feature map that generates only product states can be evaluated in time $\mathcal{O}(n)$ for $n$ qubits. To obtain an advantage over classical approaches we need to implement a map based on circuits that are hard to simulate classically. Since quantum computers are not expected to be classically simulable, there exists a long list of (universal) circuit families we can choose from. Here we use a circuit that works well in our experiments and is not too deep. We define a feature map on $n$-qubits generated by the unitary $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} = U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} H^{\otimes n} U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} H^{\otimes n}$, where $H$ denotes the conventional Hadamard gate and

$$U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} = \exp\left( i \sum_{S \subseteq [n]} \phi_S(\boldsymbol{x}) \prod_{i \in S} Z_i \right)$$

is a diagonal gate in the Pauli Z-basis; see Fig. 1b. This circuit acts on the initial state $|0\rangle^n$. We use the coefficients $\phi_S(\boldsymbol{x}) \in \mathbb{R}$ to encode the data $\boldsymbol{x} \in \Omega$. In general any diagonal unitary $U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ can be used if it can be implemented efficiently. This is, for instance, the case when only weight $|S| \le 2$ interactions are considered. The exact evaluation of the inner product between two states generated from a similar circuit with only a single diagonal layer $U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ is #P-hard$^{20}$. Nonetheless, in the experimentally relevant context of additive error approximation, simulation of a single-layer preparation circuit can be achieved efficiently classically by uniform sampling$^{21}$. We conjecture that the additive error approximation of inner products generated from circuits with two Hadamard layers and diagonal gates is hard classically; see Supplementary Information for a discussion.

$^1$IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. $^2$Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford, UK. $^3$Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. *e-mail: adcorcol@us.ibm.com; kptemme@ibm.com
