**Fig. 1 | Quantum kernel functions.** **a**, Feature map representation for a single qubit. A classical dataset in the interval $\Omega = (0, 2\pi]$ with binary labels (**a**, right) can be mapped onto the Bloch sphere (red and blue lines) by using the non-linear feature map described in **b**. For a single qubit $U_{\Phi(x)} = Z_x$ is a phase-gate of angle $x \in \Omega$. The mapped data can be separated by the hyperplane given by normal $\boldsymbol{w}$. States with a positive expectation value of $\boldsymbol{w}$ receive a [+1] (red) label, while negative values are labelled [-1] (blue). **b**, For the general circuit $U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ is formed by products of single- and two-qubit unitaries that are diagonal in the computational basis. In our experiments, both the training and testing data are artificially generated to be perfectly classifiable using the feature map. The circuit family depends non-linearly on the data through the coefficients $\phi_S(\boldsymbol{x})$ with $|S| \le 2$. **c**, Experimental implementation of the parameterized diagonal single- and two-qubit operations using CNOTs and Z-gates.

To test our two methods, we generate artificial data that can be fully separated by our feature map. We use the map for $n=d=2$ qubits in Fig. 1b with $\phi_{\{i\}}(\boldsymbol{x}) = x_i$ and $\phi_{\{1,2\}}(\boldsymbol{x}) = (\pi - x_1)(\pi - x_2)$. We generate the labels for data vectors $\boldsymbol{x} \in T \cup S \subset (0, 2\pi]^2$, by first choosing $f = Z_1Z_2$ and a random unitary $V \in SU(4)$. To vary the distribution of the data in the experiments three different unitaries were chosen at random. Once a unitary is fixed we sample the data points $\boldsymbol{x}$ and assign $m(\boldsymbol{x}) = +1$, when $\langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | V^\dagger f V | \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) \rangle \ge \Delta$ and $m(\boldsymbol{x}) = -1$ when $\langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | V^\dagger f V | \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) \rangle \le -\Delta$; see Fig. 3b. The data has been separated by a gap of $\Delta = 0.3$. For each unitary, multiple training sets and classification sets each consisting of 20 data points per label were chosen uniformly at random. We show one such classification set as circle symbols in Fig. 3b.

The first classification protocol, quantum variational classification, follows four steps. First, the data $\boldsymbol{x} \in \Omega$ is mapped to a quantum state by applying the feature map circuit $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ in Fig. 1b to $|0\rangle^n$. Second, a short-depth quantum circuit $W(\boldsymbol{\theta})$, described in Fig. 2b, is applied to the feature state. This circuit with $l$ layers is parameterized by $\boldsymbol{\theta} \in \mathbb{R}^{2n(l+1)}$ and will be optimized during training. Third, for a two-label $y \in \{+1, -1\}$ classification problem, a binary measurement $\{M_y\}$ diagonal in the Z-basis is applied to the state $W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) \mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} |0\rangle^n$. Any measurement of this form can be written as $M_y = 2^{-1}(1 + y f)$, when $f = \sum_{z \in \{0,1\}^n} f(z)|z\rangle\langle z|$ for some Boolean function $f : \{0,1\}^n \rightarrow \{+1, -1\}$. This is implemented by measuring in the Z-basis and applying $f$ to the output bit-string. The probability of obtaining outcome $y$ is $p_y(\boldsymbol{x}) = \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | W^\dagger(\boldsymbol{\theta}) M_y W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) | \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) \rangle$. Fourth, for the decision rule we perform $R$ repeated measurement shots to obtain the empirical distribution $\hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x})$. We assign the label $\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) = y$, whenever $\hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x}) > \hat{p}_{-y}(\boldsymbol{x}) - y b$, where we have introduced an additional bias parameter $b \in [-1, 1]$ that can be optimized during training.

The feature map circuit $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$, as well as the Boolean function $f$, are fixed choices. During the training of the classifier we optimize the parameters $(\boldsymbol{\theta}, b)$. For the optimization, we need to define a cost function. For a single training sample we use the error probability $\text{Pr}(\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) \neq m(\boldsymbol{x}))$ of assigning the wrong label from the empirical distribution with $R$ shots. We optimize the empirical risk $R_{\text{emp}}(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ given by the error probability averaged over the full training set $T$. See Supplementary Information for details.

The experiment itself is split into two phases; First, we train the classifier and optimize $(\boldsymbol{\theta}, b)$. We have found that Spall's simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA)$^{22,23}$ algorithm performs well in the noisy experimental setting. We can use the circuit as a classifier after the parameters have converged to $(\boldsymbol{\theta}^*, b^*)$. Second, in the classification phase, the classifier assigns labels to unlabelled data $\boldsymbol{s} \in S$ according to the decision rule $\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{s})$.

We implement the quantum variational classifier $W(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ for five different depths ($l=0$ to $l=4$) (see Fig. 2b), on the superconducting quantum processor. We expect a higher classification success for increased depth. The binary measurement is obtained from the parity function $f = Z_1Z_2$. For each depth we generate data from three different random unitaries. We use training sets consisting of 20 data points per label. The data from one of these unitaries, together with a training set, is shown in Fig. 3b.

The optimization of the empirical risk $R_{\text{emp}}(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is shown in Fig. 3a for two different training sets and depths. In all experiments throughout this work we implemented an error mitigation technique that relies on zero-noise extrapolation to first order$^{10,24}$. To obtain a zero-noise estimate, a copy of the circuit was run on a timescale slowed down by a factor of 1.5; see Supplementary Information. This technique is...

**Fig. 2 | Experimental implementations.** **a**, Schematic of the five-qubit quantum processor. The experiment was performed on qubits $Q_0$ and $Q_1$, highlighted in the image. **b**, Variational circuit used for our optimization method. The two top qubits depict the circuit implemented. We choose a common ansatz for the variational unitary $W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) = U_{\text{loc}}^{(l)}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_l) U_{\text{ent}} ... U_{\text{loc}}^{(2)}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_2) U_{\text{ent}} U_{\text{loc}}^{(1)}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_1)^{16,17}$. We alternate layers of entangling gates $U_{\text{ent}} = \prod_{(i,j)\in E} CZ(i, j)$ with full layers of single-qubit rotations $U_{\text{loc}}^{(t)}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_t) = \otimes_{i=1}^n U(\theta_{i,t})$ with $U(\theta_{i,t}) \in SU(2)$. For the entangling step we use controlled-Z phase gates $CZ(i, j)$ along the edge $(0, 1)$ of the interaction graph $E$ of the superconducting chip. The grey background illustrates the scaling to a larger number of qubits. **c**, Circuit to directly estimate the fidelity between a pair of feature vectors for data $\boldsymbol{x}$ and $\boldsymbol{z}$ as used for our second method. The circuit on $Q_0, Q_1$ depicts the circuit implemented, while the grey background illustrates the general structure of the circuit. The circuit is comprised of Hadamard gates $H$ interleaved with the diagonal unitary $U_{\phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ parameterized by $\phi_S(\boldsymbol{x})$ to directly estimate the fidelity between a pair of feature vectors for data $\boldsymbol{x}$ and $\boldsymbol{z}$ as used for our second method.
