**Fig. 3 | Convergence of the method and classification results.** **a**, Convergence of the cost function $R_{\text{emp}}(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ after 250 iterations of Spall's SPSA algorithm. Red (or black) curves correspond to $l = 4$ (or $l = 0$). The cost function with $\hat{p}_y$ estimates obtained from zero-noise extrapolation (solid lines) is compared to the cost function with unmitigated estimates (dashed). We train three datasets per depth and perform 20 classifications per trained set. **c**, The classifications results are shown as blue histograms for all three randomly chosen unitaries (a total of 60 classifications per depth and 20 data points per classification per label), with mean values represented by black dots. The error bar is the standard error of the mean. The inset shows histograms as a function of the probability of measuring label $+1$ for one test set of 20 points per label obtained with an $l = 4$ classifier circuit, depicting classification of this set with 100% success.

The dashed red lines show the results of our direct kernel estimation method for comparison, with Sets I and II yielding 100% success and Set III yielding 94.75% success. **b**, Example data used for both methods in this work. The data labels (red for $+1$ label and blue for $-1$ label) are generated with a gap of $\Delta = 0.3$ (white areas). The training set with 20 points per label is shown as white and black circles. For the quantum kernel estimation method we show the support vectors (green circles) and a classified test set (white and black squares). Three points are misclassified, labelled as A, B and C. For each of the test data points $\boldsymbol{s}_j$ we plot $\sum_i y_i \alpha_i^* K(\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{s}_j)$ at the bottom of **b**. Points A, B and C, all belonging to label $+1$, give $\sum_i y_i \alpha_i^* K(\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{s}_j) = -1.033$, $-0.367$ and $-1.082$, respectively.

implemented at each trial step, and the mitigated cost function is fed to the classical optimizer. We observe that the empirical risk in Fig. 3a converges to a lower value for depth $l=4$ than for $l=0$, albeit with more optimization steps. The number of shots is an explicit parameter in $\text{Pr}(\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) \neq m(\boldsymbol{x}))$. We set $R=200$ to obtain a smoother cost function, even though we used 2,000 shots in the experiment to estimate $\hat{p}_y$.

After each training is completed, we use the trained parameters $(\boldsymbol{\theta}^*, b^* = 0)$ to classify 20 different test sets—where each set of 20 inputs with plus labels and 20 inputs with minus labels is drawn uniformly at random for each of the three different random unitaries. We run these classification experiments at 20,000 shots, versus the 2,000 used for training. The classification of each data point is error-mitigated. Figure 3c shows the classification results for our quantum variational approach. We observe an increase in classification success with increasing circuit depth (see Fig. 3c), reaching values very close to 100% for depths larger than 1. This classification success remarkably persists to depth 4, despite the decoherence associated with eight CNOTs in the training and classification circuits, for $l=4$.

The binary measurement of the variational circuit classifier corresponds to a separating hyperplane in the quantum feature space and implements a linear threshold function as used in a conventional SVM$^{14,18}$. To see this, we write $p_y(\boldsymbol{x}) = 2^{-1}(1 + y \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | W^\dagger(\boldsymbol{\theta}) f W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) | \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) \rangle)$. If we now define $W^\dagger(\boldsymbol{\theta}) f W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) = \boldsymbol{w}$ and the state $\Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) = |\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|$, the ideal decision rule $p_y(\boldsymbol{x}) > p_{-y}(\boldsymbol{x}) - yb$ corresponds to the labelling function $\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) = \text{sign}(\text{tr}[\boldsymbol{w} \Phi(\boldsymbol{x})] + b)$. The trace is read as the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product between the normal vector $\boldsymbol{w}$ and the mapped datum $\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})$. This provides the motivation to interpret the quantum state space as feature space with vectors $|\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|$ and inner products $K(\boldsymbol{x}, \boldsymbol{z}) = |\langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | \Phi(\boldsymbol{z}) \rangle|^2$. We note that the use of $\mathcal{H} = (\mathbb{C}^2)^{\otimes n}$ as feature space would lead to a conceptual problem since a vector $|\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle \in \mathcal{H}$ is only physically defined up to a global phase.

A shallow variational circuit can restrict the possible hyperplane normal $\boldsymbol{w}$. An unrestricted optimization over all hyperplanes, such as the standard Wolfe-dual of the SVM$^{14}$, can be used when the kernel $K(\boldsymbol{x}, \boldsymbol{z})$ is known. This optimization problem only depends on $|T|$ variables and is concave whenever $K(\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{x}_j)$ is positive semi-definite. This means that the unique, optimal solution can be found with polynomial resources in the training set size.

The second classification protocol, quantum kernel estimation, uses this connection to implement a conventional SVM with this kernel directly. The quantum computer is used twice in this protocol. First, the kernel $K(\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{x}_j)$ is estimated on a quantum computer for all pairs of training samples $\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{x}_j \in T$; see Fig. 2c. This kernel is then used in the Wolfe-dual SVM to find the optimal hyperplane. In the classification phase the quantum computer is used a second time to estimate the kernel $K(\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{s})$ for a new datum $\boldsymbol{s} \in S$ and the support vectors from the...

**Fig. 4 | Kernels for Set III.** **a**, Experimental (left) and ideal (right) kernel matrices containing the inner products of all data points used for training Set III (round symbols in Fig. 3b). The maximal deviation from the ideal kernel $|K - \hat{K}|$ occurs at element $K_{8,15}$. A cut through row 8 (indicated by the red arrow in **a**) is shown in **b**, where the experimental (or ideal) results are shown as red (or blue) bars. We note that entries that are close to zero in the kernel can become negative (such as $K_{8,30}$ in **b**) when the error-mitigation technique is applied.
