### **II. DESCRIPTION OF THE ALGORITHMS**

We consider two different learning schemes. The first is referred to as "Quantum variational classification", the second is referred to "Quantum kernel estimation". When binary classification problems are considered, both schemes construct a separating hyperplane in the state space of $n$ qubits, c.f. section III B. The first scheme is also able to operate in a multi label setting. The classical data is mapped to this space with $\text{dim} = 4^n$ using a unitary circuit family that depends non-linearly on a datum, starting from the reference state $|0\rangle\langle0|^n$.

#### **A. Quantum variational classification**

For our first classification approach we design a variational algorithm which exploits the large dimensional Hilbert space of our quantum processor to find an optimal cutting hyperplane in a similar vein as Support Vector Machines (SVM) do. The algorithm consists of two main parts: a training stage, c.f. algorithm 3, and a classification stage c.f. algorithm 4. For the training stage, a set of labeled data points is provided, on which the algorithm is performed. For the classification stage, we take a different set of data points and run the optimized classifying circuit on them without any label input. Then we compare the label of each data point to the output of the classifier to obtain a success ratio for the data set. For both the training and the classification stages, the quantum circuit that implements the algorithm comprises three main parts: the encoding of the feature map, c.f. section IV A, Fig 2, the variational optimization, c.f. section V, Fig 3 and the measurement, c.f. section VI. These steps are combined in to the circuit depicted in Fig 1.

**FIG. 1.** Quantum variational classification: The circuit takes a references state, $|0\rangle^n$, applies the unitary $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ followed by the variational unitary $W(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ and applies a measurement in the Z-basis. The resulting bit string $z \in \{0,1\}^n$ is then mapped to a label in $C$. This circuit is re - run multiple times and sampled to estimate the expectation value $p_y = \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | W^\dagger(\boldsymbol{\theta}) M_y W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) | \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) \rangle$ for the labels $y \in C$. In the experiment we consider $C = \{+1, -1\}$.

We state the cost-function for the binary classification problem. The more general case is discussed in section VI B. During the training we optimize the parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ of the variational circuit $W(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ and possibly a bias parameter $b \in [-1, +1]$. Both the feature map circuit $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi}$, as well as well as the function $f : \{0,1\}^n \rightarrow C$ are fixed and chosen by the programmer. For the optimization, we need to define a cost-function. This choice is discussed in section VI. We define the empirical risk $R_{\text{emp}}(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ in terms of the the error probability $\text{Pr}(\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) \neq m(\boldsymbol{x}))$ of assigning the incorrect label, based on the decision rule $\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{s}) = \text{argmax}_y \{\hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{s})\}$ after R shots, averaged over the samples in the training set $T$. In the binary case this decision rule simplifies to $\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) = y$ whenever $\hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x}) > \hat{p}_{-y}(\boldsymbol{x}) - yb$.

$$R_{\text{emp}}(\boldsymbol{\theta}) = \frac{1}{|T|} \sum_{\boldsymbol{x} \in T} \text{Pr}\left(\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) \neq m(\boldsymbol{x})\right) \;.$$

For the binary problem, the error probability of assigning the wrong label is given by the binomial cumulative density function (CDF) of the empirical distribution $\hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x})$, c.f. section VI A. The binomial CDF can be approximated for a large number of samples (shots) $R \gg 1$ by a sigmoid function $\text{sig}(x) = (1 + e^{-x})^{-1}$. The probability that the label $m(\boldsymbol{x}) = y$ is assigned incorrectly is approximated by

$$\text{Pr}\left(\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) \neq m(\boldsymbol{x})\right) \approx \text{sig}\left( \frac{\sqrt{R} \left( \frac{1}{2} - \left( \hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x}) + \frac{yb}{2} \right) \right)}{\sqrt{2(1 - \hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x}))\hat{p}_y(\boldsymbol{x})}} \right) \;.$$

The training phase consists of the following steps:
