**FIG. 2.** A circuit representation of the feature map family we consider here. We first apply a series of Hadamard gates before applying the diagonal phase gate component. Then we apply a second layer of Hadamard gates, followed by the same diagonal phase gate. This encodes both the actual function value of the phase $\Phi_{\boldsymbol{x}}(z)$ as well as the value of the $\mathbb{Z}_2^N$ Fourier transform $\hat{\Phi}_{\boldsymbol{x}}(S)$ for every basis element.

two diagonal layers in $\tilde{\mathcal{U}}_\Phi = U_{\Phi^2} H^{\otimes n} U_{\Phi^1} H^{\otimes n}$ to differ. We choose the phase gate layers so that $U_{\Phi^1}$ and $U_{\Phi^2}$ encode a shifted bent-function and the function's dual, then the circuit $\mathcal{A}_1$ is given by $H^{\otimes n}\tilde{\mathcal{U}}_\Phi$. If the interaction graph $G$ is bi-partite, it is possible to encode Maiorana-McFarland bent-functions for $d = 2$ by choosing the corresponding $\phi_{\{k,l\}}(\boldsymbol{x}), \phi_k(\boldsymbol{x})$ to be either $\pi$ or $0$. In [7], the diagonal layer in $\mathcal{A}_1$, are queries to an oracle encoding the the shifted bent-function and it's dual. It can be shown that with respect to this oracle there is an exponential separation in query complexity over classical query algorithms.

The final circuit we implement to estimate the overlap $|\langle\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})\rangle|^2$, c.f. Fig 5 b) is still larger. This circuit has four layers of Hadamard gates and 3 diagonal layers. A circuit that has this kind of structure is related to a problem introduced by Aaronson and Ambainis [8]. The problem is referred to $k$-fold Forrelation, c.f. [8], section 1.1.3. where given $k$ total Boolean functions $f_i : \{0, 1\} \rightarrow \{+1, -1\}$, $i = 1 \dots k$ one has to decide, whether the sum

$$F_{f_1, f_2, \dots, f_k} = \frac{1}{2^{(k+1)n/2}} \sum_{x_1, \dots, x_k \in \{0,1\}^n} f_1(x_1)(-1)^{x_1 \circ x_2}f_2(x_2)(-1)^{x_2 \circ x_3} \dots (-1)^{x_{k-1} \circ x_k} f_k(x_k), \qquad (35)$$

satisfies $|F_{f_1, f_2, \dots, f_k}| \le 100^{-1}$ or whether $F_{f_1, f_2, \dots, f_k} \ge 3/5$, promised that one of these holds. The authors show, that any classical, randomized algorithm that has only black box access to the Boolean functions must make $\mathcal{O}(2^{n/2}n^{-1})$ queries to these black box functions to solve the problem. However, a quantum computer is able to solve this problem with $k$ queries (in fact only $\lceil k/2 \rceil$ queries ) to a phase oracle that encodes the Boolean function through $U_{f_i}|x\rangle = f_i(x)|x\rangle$ with bounded probability. The algorithm starts by preparing the initial state $|0\rangle^{\otimes n}$ and applies an alternating sequence of Hadamard gates $H^{\otimes n}$ and queries to the oracles $U_{f_i}$ like

$$H^{\otimes n} \rightarrow U_{f_1} \rightarrow H^{\otimes n} \rightarrow U_{f_2} \rightarrow H^{\otimes n} \rightarrow \dots \rightarrow U_{f_k} \rightarrow H^{\otimes n}. \qquad (36)$$

Finally if we measure all $n$ - qubits in the $Z$ - basis, we observe that probability to obtain the outcome $|0\rangle^{\otimes n}$ is exactly $|F_{f_1, f_2, \dots, f_k}|^2$. So if we compare $k$-fold Forrelation with $k = 3$ to the estimation of the quantum Kernel, $|\langle\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})\rangle|^2 = |\langle 0|^{\otimes n} H^{\otimes n} U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger H^{\otimes n} U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} H^{\otimes n} U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} H^{\otimes n} |0\rangle^{\otimes n}$, we observe that the implementation of the phase gates $U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$, $U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ and $U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger$ assume the roles of the oracles $U_{f_1} \, U_{f_2}$ and $U_{f_3}$ queried in 3-fold Forrelation respectively. Hence, the kernel estimation we perform here is directly related to the Forrelation problem by Aaronson and Ambainis.

If the conjecture, that estimating the kernel entries is hard could be proven, it would establish a valuable step in rigorously establishing a quantum advantage on near-term devices. If, however, it ultimately turns out that this family can also be evaluated classically, we would need to improve the complexity of this circuit family. This could be achieved by increasing the number of layers and / or the interactions present in the diagonal unitary.

A good example of a circuit family that entails a hardness result, yet does not provide an advantage in our setting is the following: One could consider the case, where only a single layer of Hadamard gates and a single diagonal unitary is applied. Such a feature map is directly related to the circuit family introduced in [9]. Indeed the resulting kernel $K(\boldsymbol{x}, \boldsymbol{y}) = |\langle 0^n | H^{\otimes n} U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})} U_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} H^{\otimes n} | 0^n \rangle|^2$ corresponds to the output probability of the considered
