optimal Lagrange multipliers $\alpha_i$ and support vectors $N_S$ can be obtained. From this the classifier can be constructed, c.f .eqn. (19). To apply the classifier to a new datum $\boldsymbol{s} \in S$ the kernel $K(\boldsymbol{x}_i, \boldsymbol{s})$ between $\boldsymbol{s}$ and the support vectors in $i \in N_S$ has to be estimated. We discuss two methods to estimate this overlap.

**FIG. 5.** a) Estimating the expectation value of the SWAP- matrix as derived in [14]. This circuit diagonalizes the SWAP - gate, when it is treated as a hermitian observables with eigenvalues $\pm 1$. Averaging the eigenvalues, c.f. eqn. (49), with samples from the output distribution constructs an estimator for $|\langle\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})\rangle|^2$. b) The circuit estimates the fidelity between two states in feature space directly by first applying the unitary $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ followed by the inverse $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger$ and measuring all bits at the output of the circuit. The frequency $\nu_{0, \dots, 0} = |\langle\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})|\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})\rangle|^2$ of the all the zero outcome precisely corresponds to the desired state overlap.

The usual method of estimating the fidelity between two states is by using the swap test [15]. This circuit, however, is not a short depth circuit on a quantum computing architecture with geometrically local gates. It would require a sequence of controlled SWAP, also known as Fredkin gates, all conditioned on the state of the same ancilla qubit. A very nice protocol was recently developed in [14]. The authors have learned multiple ways of optimizing the conventional swap test. If only the value of the fidelity is needed, as is the case for our algorithm, the authors propose, c.f. [14] section III.C, a circuit that is constant depth if pairs of CNOT gates can be executed in parallel. This circuit, c.f. Fig 5.a, evaluates the expectation value $\langle \psi | \langle \phi | \text{SWAP} | \psi \rangle | \phi \rangle$ directly. The action of their algorithm can be understood as follows:

The SWAP gate is both a unitary gate and a hermitian observable $\text{SWAP}^\dagger = \text{SWAP}$ with eigenvalues $\pm 1$. The expectation value on two product states as we said given by
$\langle \psi | \langle \phi | \text{SWAP} | \psi \rangle | \phi \rangle = |\langle \phi | \psi \rangle|^2$. Now the gate can be decomposed in to a product of two qubit swap gates $\text{SWAP} = \prod_{k=1}^n \text{SWAP}_{s_k t_k}$ that act all in parallel. To evaluate the expectation value one has to diagonalize the full gate. This is achieved by diagonalizing the individual two-qubit swap gates and observing that $\text{SWAP}_{ij} = \text{CNOT}_{i \rightarrow j} \text{CNOT}_{j \rightarrow i} \text{CNOT}_{i \rightarrow j}$. Using the circuit identity $\text{CNOT}_{j \rightarrow i} = H_j \text{CZ}_{ji} H_j$, we see that $\text{SWAP}_{ij}$ is diagonalized by $\text{CNOT}_{j \rightarrow i} H_j$ and has eigenvalue $(-1)^{x_i x_j}$. For the full circuit Fig 5.a one first applies a transversal set of CNOT gates across both registers followed by a single layer of Hadamard gates $H$ on the top register. Then the output is sampled and the average of the boolean function

$$f(s,t) = (-1)^{(s_1 t_1 + \dots s_n t_n)} \qquad (49)$$

is reported. The output bits on the top register are labeled by $s \in \{0, 1\}^n$, while $t \in \{0, 1\}^n$ is the output string on the lower register.

This method works for arbitrary input states $|\psi\rangle, |\phi\rangle$. Our states, however, are structured and are all generated by the unitary eqn. (31) as shown in Fig 2. Writing out the kernel explicitly $K(\boldsymbol{y}, \boldsymbol{x}) = |\langle\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})|\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle|^2 = |\langle 0^n | \mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger \mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} | 0^n \rangle|^2$ gives the indication of how to measure it. Simply apply the circuit $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger \mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ to the state $|0^n\rangle$, c.f. Fig 5.b. Then sample $R$ times the resulting state $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{y})}^\dagger \mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} | 0^n \rangle$ in the $Z$ basis. Record the number $r_{0^n}$ of all observed zero $0^n = (0, \dots, 0)$ bit-strings and divide by the total number of shots $R$. The frequency $r_{0^n} R^{-1}$ then gives an estimator for $K(\boldsymbol{y}, \boldsymbol{x})$ up to a sampling error $\tilde{\epsilon} = \mathcal{O}(R^{-1/2})$. A rough estimate for the operator norm $\|\cdot\|$ of the deviation of the resulting estimator $\hat{K}$ from the true kernel matrix $K$ is given by $\|K - \hat{K}\| \le \|K - \hat{K}\|_F$. Here $\|A\|_F = \sqrt{\sum_{ij} |A_{ij}|^2}$ denotes the Frobenius norm of the matrix $A$. A crude bound can then be obtained from the largest sampling error $\tilde{\epsilon}$ of all matrix entries and setting $\|K - \hat{K}\|_F \le \tilde{\epsilon}|T|$, since both matrices of the training set $T$ are of size $|T| \times |T|$. Hence to ensure a maximum deviation of $\epsilon$ with high probability a number of $R = \mathcal{O}(\epsilon^{-2}|T|^2)$ shots have to be drawn for each matrix entry. Due to the symmetry of the
