Observe that $\mathbf{f}$ only has eigenvalues $\{+1, -1\}$, and we have that $\langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) | W^\dagger(\boldsymbol{\theta}) \, \mathbf{f} \, W(\boldsymbol{\theta}) | \Phi(\boldsymbol{x}) \rangle \in [-1, +1]$. Let us now consider a decision rule, where we assign the label $y \in \{+1, -1\}$ over the label $-y$ with some fixed bias $b \in [-1, +1]$. In that case we demand that $p_y > p_{-y} - yb$. If we substitute eqn. (20) and use the expansion in eqn. (25) we have that the corresponding label is given by the decision function $y = \tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x})$, where

$$\tilde{m}(\boldsymbol{x}) = \text{sign}\left( \frac{1}{2^n} \sum_\beta w_\beta(\boldsymbol{\theta}) \Phi_\beta(\boldsymbol{x}) + b \right) . \qquad (26)$$

This expression is identical to the linear threshold function used in conventional SVM classifier, c.f. eqn. (4), after the feature map has been applied. However, in the experiment we only have access to the probabilities $p_y$ through sample estimates. Furthermore, the $w_\beta(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ are constrained to stem from the observable $\mathbf{f}$ measured in the rotated frame. If this constraint is dropped, and we are able to optimize over all possible hyperplanes in feature space, the classifier can be improved.

Furthermore, this decomposition indicates that the correct feature space, where a linearly separating hyperplane is constructed, is in fact the quantum state space of density matrices, and not the Hilbert space $\mathcal{H}_2^n$ itself. The physical states in $\mathcal{H}_2^n$ are only defined up to a global phase $|\psi\rangle \sim e^{i\eta} |\psi\rangle$. The equivalence of states up to a global phase would make it impossible to find a separating hyperplane in this space, since both $|\psi\rangle$ and $-|\psi\rangle$ give rise to the same physical state but can lie on either side of a separating plane determined by an inner-product $\langle \mathbf{w} | \psi \rangle$.

Hence, it is evident that a quantum circuit can only generate linear decision surfaces since it acts only as a unitary on the input state. The complex transformation, i.e. the non-linear mapping to the feature space, has to occur when the data itself is mapped to the quantum computer. Therefore, if we want to improve the classifier over what can be accomplished classically the improvement has to occur at this step. If the classical data is mapped to a quantum state in such a fashion that the inner-products of the states can be evaluated efficiently classically no quantum advantage can be achieved. The classical optimization problem in the SVM is a concave problem in $|T|^2$ variables, which means that it has a unique solution that can be found efficiently. The use of a conventional SVM presents an advantage over using a variational circuit in that it will not get stuck in local minima and can optimize over all hyperplanes in the state space.

#### **IV. ENCODING OF THE DATA USING A SUITABLE FEATURE MAP**

In the quantum setting, the feature map is an injective encoding of classical information $\boldsymbol{x} \in \mathbb{R}^d$ into a quantum state $|\Phi\rangle\langle\Phi|$ on an $n$-qubit register. Here $\mathcal{H}_2 = \mathbb{C}^2$ is a single qubit Hilbert space, and $\mathcal{S}\left(\mathcal{H}_2^{\otimes n}\right)$ denotes the cone of positive semidefinite density matrices $\rho \ge 0$ with unit trace $\text{tr}\left[\rho\right] = 1$. This cone is a subset of the $4^n$ dimensional Hilbert space of $\mathcal{M}_{2^n \times 2^n}(\mathbb{C})$ of complex matrices when fitted with the inner product $\text{tr}\left[A^\dagger B\right]$ for $A, B \in \mathcal{M}_{2^n \times 2^n}(\mathbb{C})$. The feature map acts as

$$\Phi : \Omega \subset \mathbb{R}^d \rightarrow \mathcal{S}\left(\mathcal{H}_2^{\otimes n}\right), \qquad \Phi : \boldsymbol{x} \mapsto |\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle \langle \Phi(\boldsymbol{x})| . \qquad (27)$$

The action of the map can be understood by a unitary circuit family denoted by $\mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})}$ that is applied to some reference state, e.g. $|0\rangle^n$. The resulting state is given by $|\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle = \mathcal{U}_{\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})} |0\rangle^n$. The state in the feature space should depend non-linearly on the data. Let us discuss proposals for possible feature maps.

*Product state feature maps* There are many choices for the feature map $\Phi$. Let us first discuss what would happen if we were to choose a feature map that corresponds to a product input state. We assume a feature map, comprised of single qubit rotations $U(\varphi) \in \text{SU}(2)$ on every qubit of the quantum circuit. The angles for every qubit can be chosen as a non-linear function $\varphi : \boldsymbol{x} \rightarrow (0, 2\pi]^2 \times [0, \pi]$ into the space of Euler angles for the individual qubits, so that the full feature map can be implemented as:

$$\boldsymbol{x} \mapsto |\phi_i(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle = U(\varphi_i(\boldsymbol{x})) |0\rangle, \quad \text{for an individual qubit, so that} \qquad (28)$$
$$\Phi : \boldsymbol{x} \mapsto |\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle\langle\Phi(\boldsymbol{x})| = \bigotimes_{i=1}^n |\phi_i(\boldsymbol{x})\rangle\langle\phi_i(\boldsymbol{x})| \quad \text{for the full qubit state.} \qquad (29)$$

One example for such an implementation is the unitary implementation of the feature map used in the context of the classical classifiers by Stoudenmire and Schwab [5] based on tensor networks. There each qubit encodes a single
